---
title: "Secret verb forms in Hindi"
layout: post
date: 2022-05-23
tags:
  - Hindi
leipzig: yes
aliases:
    - "/20220523-tam"
    - "/20220523-tam.html"
description: "There are some strange verb forms in Hindi that I haven't seen described in any grammar or paper. I've collected some of them here."
---

Hindi is the best-studied language in South Asia. It would not be the
worst thing if every linguist working on Hindi decided to take a break
and pick any other language of the region to study. Nonetheless, Hindi
does not set a relatively high bar for linguistic investigation when
compared to other languages of the world; there is plenty that simply
hasn\'t been described in any work by a linguist, let alone analysed or
explained.

I\'ve gone through several grammars of Hindi in my decade-long quest to
recover something close to native-speaker status in my L1. (This is a
not uncommon frustration among Indian-Americans.) My favourite is Kachru
(2006), which covers many aspects of the language in a fairly accessible
format. It was the first linguistic grammar I ever read and probably the
only one I\'ve ever gone through cover-to-cover. But surprisingly, there
are many strange properties of Hindi morphosyntax that I have not seen
described in any comprehensive grammar, and none of the papers I\'ve
read. This is an attempt to document some of these verb forms.
Imperatives are also attested.

## V\[pfv\] *karnā*

This construction is used to express a very habitual action. I have
largely seen it in the past tense; it seems weird to use it with other
tenses, and web searches informally appear to only attest the past
tense.

{{< ex >}}
pūr-e din mẽ ḍeṛʰ rupa-e k-ā ek vaṛā-pāv **kʰā-y-ā** **kar-t-ā** tʰ-ā

whole-M.OBL day LOC 1½ rupee-OBL GEN-M.SG one vada.pav eat-PFV-M.SG do-IPFV-M.SG be.PST-M.SG

“In the whole day, he used to eat a single 1½-rupee vada pav.” (*Dai̯nik Bʰāskar*)

{{</ ex >}}

{{< ex >}}
   hāy mar jā-ẽg-e / ham to luṭṭ jā-ẽge / ai̯s-ī bāt-ẽ **kiy-ā** nā **kar-o**

   sigh die go-FUT.1PL-M.PL / 1PL TOP be.looted go-FUT.1PL / such-F.PL talk-PL do.PFV-M.SG NEG do-IMP.2PL

   “Oh, I'll die / I'll be made worthless / Don't keep saying such things!” (*Āj jāne kī zidd nā karo*, Farīdā Xānum)

{{</ ex >}}

What is weird is that the main verb takes the perfective while the light
verb takes the imperfective, which makes no sense at all since that
assigns conflicting aspectual values to the event! That violates one of
the usual properties of serial verb constructions universally: shared
aspectual features on all verbs in the SVC.

The usual way to express a habitual action in Hindi is the imperfective
(see below).

{{< ex >}}
   vo roz jā-t-ā tʰ-ā

   3SG every.day go-IPFV-M.SG be.PST-M.SG

   “He used to go every day.”

{{</ ex >}}

The perfective, however, is ambiguously the habitual or just a single
event, without extra information. In the sentence above, the temporal
adjunct *roz* makes it clear that the event repeats. Compare this:

{{< ex >}}
   vo jā-t-ā h-ai̯

   3SG go-PFV-M.SG be-3SG

   “He goes (once/habitually).”

{{</ ex >}}

Presumably, with the need to talk about an unambiguous habitual event,
this kind of construction developed to fill the gap.

## V\[ipfv\] *rahnā*

The history of *rahnā* has been studied in the linguistic literature, as
a transparent grammaticalisation of "to remain" into a continuous aspect
marker. It\'s gaining in popularity in other languages due to the
influence of Hindi--Urdu; see Slade (2013). What\'s interesting here is
that it can be used with not only a bare stem, but also the
imperfective-aspect main verb!

{{< ex >}}
   **jī-te rah-o** beṭ-e

   live-IPFV stay-IMP.2PL child-VOC

   “Bless you, child.” (said when one's child touches one's feet)

{{</ ex >}}

You may ask again, how can one serial verb construction take two
different (and contradictory?) aspectual features? I say, the weird verb
morphosyntax I\'ve been discussing makes an absolute mess of the TAM
system of Hindi. But note that this grammaticalisation is identical to
that of *stay V-ing* in African-American Vernacular English.

## V\[cnv\] *rahnā*

This is transparently a grammaticaled converbial construction, where
what was previously literally two separate events (V-ing and then
staying put) is now analysed as a strong will towards performing the
event V.

{{< ex >}}
   āj **kah-kar** **rah-ū̃g-ā**

   today say-CONV stay-FUT.1SG-M.SG

   “Today I will say it no matter what.”

{{</ ex >}}

The grammaticalisation of converbs in Indo-Aryan languages is pretty
interesting. Converbs are prototypically supposed to indicate a separate
event from that of the main verb, but there are many instances in Hindi
and other IA languages of a converb describing the same event as the
main verb, which probably diachronically developed from a more literal
reading. For example, *paṛʰ-ke sunānā* "to read then tell" \> "to read
out loud".

## References

1.  Yamuna Kachru. 2006. *Hindi*. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins
    Publishing Company.
2.  Benjamin Slade. 2013. The diachrony of light and auxiliary verbs in
    Indo-Aryan. *Diachronica* 30(4): 531--578.