---
title: "Some CCG derivations in Hindi"
layout: post
date: 2022-10-08
tags:
  - syntax
  - Hindi
aliases:
    - "/20221008-ccg"
    - "/20221008-ccg.html"
description: "Learned about Combinatory Categorial Grammar in class, so I tried to apply it to Hindi."
---

Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) is one of the many, many (far too
many) syntactic formalisms posited by linguists in the Chomskyian era.
CCG has been outlined in work by Mark Steedman, the most recent guide
being [his 2001
book](https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Syntactic_Process/5LJaEAAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=0)
which I have to read for a class.



<style>
    td, th, .ccg {
        border: 0px;
    }
    .ccg td, .ccg th {
        text-align: center;
        padding-left: 10px;
        padding-right: 10px;
    }
    .ccg th {
        margin-bottom: 0;
        padding-bottom: 0;
    }
    .ccg td {
        padding-bottom: 7px;
        position: relative;
        font-style: italic;
    }
    .ccg td::before {
        font-size: 1em;
        line-height: 1em;
        display: block;
        content: attr(data-trans);
        position: absolute;
        top: -9.5px;
        right: 0px;
        background-color: var(--light);
        font-style: normal;
    }
    .ccg td {
        padding-bottom: 7px;
        position: relative;
        font-style: italic;
    }
    .ccg td[data-trans] {
        padding-top: 0;
        border-top: 1px solid black !important;
    }
    ol {
        list-style-type: none;
    }
    ol > li:before {
        content: '(' counter(bruh) ')';
        position: absolute;
        left: -2em;
    }
    ol > li {
        counter-increment: bruh;
        position: relative;
    }
</style>

Unlike most other syntactic theories, I find the mechanics of CCG very
elegant. There is no difference between the distributional
categorisation of a lexeme and the argument structure that it has; both
are neatly contained in the CCG type system, and the connections to type
theory just work out very nicely (with the caveat that this is in my
limited understanding of type theory).

Naturally, I was thinking about how CCG would be applied to Hindi
syntax. This isn't anything novel (see this [2017
paper](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10579-017-9379-6) on
exactly that) but for my own edification I wanted to see how flexible
CCG is across languages. Here's CCG analysis of some simply clauses in
Hindi; as you can see, all the derivations proceed backwards, which
makes sense since Hindi is pretty left-branching.

1.  ![](/img/ccg/1.png)

2.  ![](/img/ccg/2.png)

So, those were pretty straightforward; note that I also included a weak
functional representation of the semantics in the same lambda calculus
of Steedman. You can see that the familiar (S\NP)/NP of English is
replaced with (S\NP)\NP, corresponding to SOV structure in Hindi (both
verbal arguments are to the left). I do wonder how a language where the
object is further than the subject would work though.

Here's a more complex clause, with a ditransitive verb as well as
another example with non-canonical word ordering. The preferred way to
analyse non-SOV orderings (which are canonical in Hindi) is with
type-raising and then forward composition (a rare rightwards
derivation). I am reminded of how CCG handles relative clauses in
English, which have screwed-up word order due to an argument being moved
out of the clause.

3.  ![](/img/ccg/3.png)

4.  ![](/img/ccg/4.png)

One thing I would like to explore is ergativity. Ergativity has been
studied to death by Hindi linguists, unfortunately. But I like how you
can easily express the verbal ergative agreement using a feature on the
subject, which even works well where a serial verb overrides the
agreement of a main verb. Also, check out all the nice left derivations!

5.  ![](/img/ccg/5.png)

6.  ![](/img/ccg/6.png)

Here's how *lenā* and *cuknā* are handled as serial verbs; the former
takes the ergative and the latter does not. The backward composition
operation overrides the unspecified subject type of the bare verb *kar*.

7.  ![](/img/ccg/7.png)

8.  ![](/img/ccg/8.png)

Dative subjects:

9.  ![](/img/ccg/9.png)